WIKI.md, before:

Welcome to the CogAlg wiki!

Much of the coding was done by [Khanh Nguyen](https://github.com/khanh93vn/CogAlg) and [Kok Wei Chee](https://github.com/kwcckw/CogAlg), according to the principles introduced in README.

Main principle is input selection for projected match, quantified by cross-comparison on all levels of input composition. First such level in my scheme is pixel, vs. whole image in conventional CV. Pixel cross-comp (cross-correlation) computes brightness gradient in a sliding kernel, which is a basic edge-detection operator. Next step is selection: pixels + pixel-level gradients are clustered into positive and negative blobs: contiguous areas of above or below- average gradient. 

To preserve positional info, this algorithm must be specific to external or Cartesian dimensionality of the input. Thus, we have three dimensionality-specific self-contained folders:

**line_1D_alg:**

- [line_patterns](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/line_1D_alg/line_patterns.py) is 1st-level core algorithm for 1D input: horizontal rows of pixels within an image. It forms patterns: line segments with same-sign deviation of difference between pixels, as well as sub-patterns by divisive hierarchical clustering. Sub-patterns are formed by recursive incremental range or incremental derivation cross-comp within selected patterns.  
- [line_PPs_draft](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/line_1D_alg/line_patterns.py) is a draft of 2nd-level 1D algorithm. It cross-compares patterns and forms patterns of patterns (PPs), then performs selective deeper cross-comp within each. It will be a prototype for meta-level: recursive increment in operations per level of composition, or agglomerative hierarchical cross-comp and clustering. 

1D algorithm is a prototype, it's the best way to demonstrate basic principles and operations. But 1D patterns are not terribly informative / predictive in our 4D space-time.


**frame_2D_alg:**

 1st level: [Chart](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/Illustrations/1st_level_2D_alg.png)
  
- [frame_blobs](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/frame_blobs.py) defines initial blobs: contiguous areas of same-sign deviation of gradient per pixel. It's a basic cross-correlation and connectivity clustering within an image, but resulting blobs also contain comparison-derived parameters for future comparison between blobs (comp_blob). This code is functional. 
- [frame_blobs_par](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/frame_blobs_par.py) is POC of parallel-processing version. It is currently not much faster, but is critical for future scalability. 

- [intra_blob](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/tree/master/frame_2D_alg/intra_blob): recursive calls to intra_comp: cross-comparison at extended range or higher derivation within selected blobs and then sub_blobs. Each call converts input blob into root blob and forms respective sub_blobs: contiguous areas of same-sign deviation of a new gradient.

  [Diagram](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/Illustrations/intra_blob_scheme.png), functional, but may have bugs.
   
  - [intra_comp](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/intra_comp.py) cross-compares pixels over extended range, or cross-compares angle of gradient, forming corresponding type of new gradient.
  - [draw_intra_comp](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/draw_intra_comp.py) computes gradients of the first three layers of forks over the whole frame, for visualization only (old version).  
  - [P_blob](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/P_blob.py) is selective for salient smooth edge blobs. It forms edge-orthogonal Ps, selectively cross-compares their internal gradients, then forms vertically contiguous stacks of Ps. These stacks are evaluated for comp_P, below. 
  
- [comp_P_draft](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/comp_P_draft.py): will be terminal fork of intra_blob. It cross-compares between vertically consecutive Ps: horizontal slices of blob segments. It will be selective for elongated blobs: likely edge contours. Comp_P is a version line-tracing: 2D -> 1D dimensionality reduction, converting edges into vector representations. This is similar to second level of 1D alg: [line_PPs_draft](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/line_1D_alg/line_patterns.py). It's currently in pseudo code, will be the next stage of this project.
  
 2nd level and a prototype for recursive meta-level 2D algorithm, to be added:
 
   - merge_blob_: merge weak blobs (with negative summed value) into infra-blob, for comp_blob_ but not intra_blob,
   - comp_blob_: cross-comp of same range and derivation blobs within root blob ) frame, 
     forms incrementally higher-composition super-blobs, with selective extended cross-comp of their elements,
   - comp_layer_: cluster | reorder -> bi-directional hierarchy? sub_blobs comp to higher-blob: contour or axis? 
   - eval_overlap: redundant reps of combined-core positive blob areas, vertical or cross-fork. 
    
  
**video_3D_alg:**

- [video_draft()](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/video_3D_alg/video_draft.py) is obsolete 3D extension of pixel-level cross-correlation, as in frame_blobs. Eventually, it will extend all of 2D alg with time dimension. This version will be made fully recursive and hopefully effective in real world.


Higher levels of each D-cycle algorithm will do discontinuous search among dimensionally-complete patterns: blobs or graphs. The most complex part there will be cross-comparison, because it has to operate on multi-level, multi-variate input patterns, with multiple arithmetic powers (such as comparison by division). And this comparison will have variable and generally expanding range, resulting in looser proximity clustering, vs. connectivity clustering on the 1st level.    
Complete hierarchical algorithm will have two-level code: 

- 1st level algorithm: contiguous cross-comparison over full-D cycle, plus feedback to adjust most and least significant bits of the input. 
- Recurrent increment in complexity, extending current-level alg to next-level alg. This increment will account for increasing internal complexity of input patterns on higher levels, unfolding them for cross-comparison and re-combining the results for evaluation and feedback.

We will then add colors, maybe audio and text. Initial testing could be recognition of labeled images, but 2D is also a poor representation of our 4D world, we will probably start directly with video or stereo video.

Suggestions and collaboration are most welcome, see [CONTRIBUTING](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Commit message:

Mostly refactoring. Do we have any obvious issues with frame_blobs, intra_blob and P_blob now?

WIKI.md, after:

Welcome to the CogAlg wiki!

Much of the coding was done by [Khanh Nguyen](https://github.com/khanh93vn/CogAlg) and [Kok Wei Chee](https://github.com/kwcckw/CogAlg), according to the principles introduced in README.

Main principle is input selection for projected match, quantified by cross-comparison on all levels of input composition. First such level in my scheme is pixel, vs. whole image in conventional CV. Pixel cross-comp (cross-correlation) computes brightness gradient in a sliding kernel, which is a basic edge-detection operator. Next step is selection: pixels + pixel-level gradients are clustered into positive and negative blobs: contiguous areas of above or below- average gradient. 

To preserve positional info, this algorithm must be specific to external or Cartesian dimensionality of the input. Thus, we have three dimensionality-specific self-contained folders:

**line_1D_alg:**

- [line_patterns](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/line_1D_alg/line_patterns.py) is 1st-level core algorithm for 1D input: horizontal rows of pixels within an image. It forms patterns: line segments with same-sign deviation of difference between pixels, as well as sub-patterns by divisive hierarchical clustering. Sub-patterns are formed by recursive incremental range or incremental derivation cross-comp within selected patterns.  
- [line_PPs_draft](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/line_1D_alg/line_patterns.py) is a draft of 2nd-level 1D algorithm. It cross-compares patterns and forms patterns of patterns (PPs), then performs selective deeper cross-comp within each. It will be a prototype for meta-level: recursive increment in operations per level of composition, or agglomerative hierarchical cross-comp and clustering. 

1D algorithm is a prototype, it's the best way to demonstrate basic principles and operations. But 1D patterns are not terribly informative / predictive in our 4D space-time.


**frame_2D_alg:**

 1st level: [Chart](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/Illustrations/1st_level_2D_alg.png)
  
- [frame_blobs](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/frame_blobs.py) defines initial blobs: contiguous areas of same-sign deviation of gradient per pixel. It's a basic cross-correlation and connectivity clustering within an image, but resulting blobs also contain comparison-derived parameters for future comparison between blobs (comp_blob). This code is functional. 
- [frame_blobs_par](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/frame_blobs_par.py) is POC of parallel-processing version. It is currently not much faster, but is critical for future scalability. 

- [intra_blob](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/tree/master/frame_2D_alg/intra_blob): recursive calls to intra_comp: cross-comparison at extended range or higher derivation within selected blobs and then sub_blobs. Each call converts input blob into root blob and forms respective sub_blobs: contiguous areas of same-sign deviation of a new gradient.

  [Diagram](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/Illustrations/intra_blob_scheme.png), functional, but may have bugs.
   
  - [intra_comp](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/intra_comp.py) cross-compares pixels over extended range, or cross-compares angle of gradient, forming corresponding type of new gradient.
  - [draw_intra_comp](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/draw_intra_comp.py) computes gradients of the first three layers of forks over the whole frame, for visualization only (old version).  
  - [P_blob](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/P_blob.py) is selective for salient smooth edge blobs. It forms edge-orthogonal Ps, selectively cross-compares their internal gradients, then forms vertically contiguous stacks of Ps. These stacks are evaluated for comp_P, below. 
  
- [comp_P_draft](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/frame_2D_alg/comp_P_draft.py): will be terminal fork of intra_blob. It cross-compares between vertically consecutive Ps: horizontal slices of blob segments. It will be selective for elongated blobs: likely edge contours. Comp_P is a version line-tracing: 2D -> 1D dimensionality reduction, converting edges into vector representations. This is similar to second level of 1D alg: [line_PPs_draft](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/line_1D_alg/line_patterns.py). It's a work-in-progress.
  
 2nd level and a prototype for recursive meta-level 2D algorithm, to be added:
 
   - comp_blob_: cross-comp of same range and derivation blobs within root blob or frame, 
     default for top P level (A, G|M), specification if input value + match, cluster by match only?
     forms incrementally higher-composition super-blobs, with selective extended cross-comp of their elements,
   - comp_layer_: cluster | reorder -> bi-directional hierarchy? sub_blobs comp to higher-blob: contour or axis?
     (this is within comp_blob) 
   - eval_overlap: redundant reps of combined-core positive blob areas, vertical or cross-fork. 
    
  
**video_3D_alg:**

- [video_draft()](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/video_3D_alg/video_draft.py) is obsolete 3D extension of pixel-level cross-correlation, as in frame_blobs. Eventually, it will extend all of 2D alg with time dimension. This version will be made fully recursive and hopefully effective in real world.


Higher levels of each D-cycle algorithm will do discontinuous search among dimensionally-complete patterns: blobs or graphs. The most complex part there will be cross-comparison, because it has to operate on multi-level, multi-variate input patterns, with multiple arithmetic powers (such as comparison by division). And this comparison will have variable and generally expanding range, resulting in looser proximity clustering, vs. connectivity clustering on the 1st level.    
Complete hierarchical algorithm will have two-level code: 

- 1st level algorithm: contiguous cross-comparison over full-D cycle, plus feedback to adjust most and least significant bits of the input. 
- Recurrent increment in complexity, extending current-level alg to next-level alg. This increment will account for increasing internal complexity of input patterns on higher levels, unfolding them for cross-comparison and re-combining the results for evaluation and feedback.

We will then add colors, maybe audio and text. Initial testing could be recognition of labeled images, but 2D is also a poor representation of our 4D world, we will probably start directly with video or stereo video.

Suggestions and collaboration are most welcome, see [CONTRIBUTING](https://github.com/boris-kz/CogAlg/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).
